pleasure today of chatting with Davis Ford at his
office in Austin about his recollections of life
as a student at Texas A&M.
Why did you attend A&M in the first place? Well, my
father was an A&M man, class of 1926, and so I grew up
with an A&M ethic. Went to football games when I was
a kid. And so I was preordained to go there, and it
was never in question. We lived in Lubbock, and of
course grew up in the shadows of Texas Tech, but I
was in A&M all the way, never in question. What were
your earliest memories of visiting A&M? Well, I
came up there on a high school day and brought five
of my friends, best friends from Lubbock, who
never really had any background at A&M
whatsoever. I was... This is going to sound a bit
ironic. I was amazed at how green and pretty it was
in the springtime compared to Lubbock. In those
days in Lubbock, you couldn't even see 10 feet
ahead because of the sandstorms that we had back in
the 50s. And I thought the whole world was hot and
sandy and dust storms until I went down to College
Station. I said, this is the most beautiful place
I've ever seen. Some people kind of laugh at it
today, but it was green and lush and trees and all.
So I said, man, it's a pretty setting. And... We
stayed in the dorms with corps members and all very
impressed. So all five of the non-A&M background
high school classmates of mine went to A&M, as long
as it was me. So we have a total of six in Lubbock that
year. When you came to enroll, how did you get
there? Did you come on the train or the bus or the
car? No. Nobody really had cars back in those days
except for rich kids, of which I was not. My dad was a
farmer, kind of middle class sort of guy. But two of
my friends were pretty wealthy kids and they had
cars. So six of us piled in two cars with all our
trunks and luggage and go from Lubbock to College
Station. Describe what you brought with you. We
were all a little bit nervous because we knew about
the Corps. I had a little bit more understanding
what the weight of this than my five high school
colleagues did. We just bought just kind of
rudimentary stuff. I'll tell you what we didn't
bring. We didn't bring golf clubs or tennis
rackets. They were just kind of the bare
essentials. We were all kind of, grew up in
Lubbock, had the Lubbock ethic. No place in the
world better being raised than Lubbock in the
1950s. So we just bought kind of the typical
things. No books, no tennis rackets, no golf
clubs, just our basic stuff. Describe the campus
physically when you got there. It was hot. And, of
course, we were from kind of the dry part of the
state, and we just sweated profusely. I could not
believe how uncomfortable it was with the
humidity. We were not used to that. I'm getting
this later probably, but it was not a freshman
privilege to have a fan in your room. Of course,
none of the dorms were air-conditioned. The only
air-conditioned building was the Cushing
Library on campus to Mount Olive. Right. But
describe the campus physically in terms of what
buildings were where. Yeah. The dominant
buildings, of course, were the Old Main, MSC, And
then all the dorms that were built back in, I guess,
the 30s, that was kind of the prominent place. The
old President's Home, the old frame President's
Home over by Spacer was still there. And it was not a
pretty campus. It was a pretty setting, not really
a pretty campus to speak of. There was no
coordination of the buildings and all. It was
enrollment, as I recall, in my freshman year, was
about 6,000 or 7,000 students, virtually all
cadet corps. How did you feel that you were treated
as a new arrival? Horrible. Horrible. I thought I
was pretty much a stud in high school. I had my hair
and a lot of girlfriends. And I grew up in Lubbock
High School doing things kids did. And over the day
we hunted and fished and chased women and played
football. Lubbock High School had been state
champion for two or three years. The last four
years we were the big football power, draw 25,000
people to a game. And Texas Tech was not much of a
football power in those days, so Lubbock High
School was the place. So we thought we were big
stuff. Came down to A&M, shaved my head, and I was
miserable. Did you go through any kind of
pre-class,
pre-academic boot camp or any experience before?
It wasn't exactly boot camp. They had what they
called fish week. So the upperclassmen were not on
campus. Describe fish week. The only people that
were there were our CO and first sergeant. our
outfits and it was just orientation there was no no
hazing or anything it was just kind of an
orientation of kind of stark setting but we were
all nervous about when the upperclassmen
particularly sophomores would get there a week
hence so we were nervous but fish week was just more
like any college orientation buying books
getting issued from the army or our military uh
apparel things like that. How'd you get assigned?
How did you? We had some requests on what outfit we
went in. I'd heard, I was in the Ordinance Corps,
I'd heard that the Ordinance Corps was one of the
better outfits on the campus and it had a lot of
technical people, engineers, things like that.
So it was, that was, I just requested it. And what
was its identifying number and letter? A
Ordinance. There was only one Ordinance outfit.
Did it have a nickname? I don't think it did.
Ordinance was, I heard this was the case before I
got there, when I got in there. It was more,
probably had more serious students than a lot of
our colleagues, the jocks and infantry. Right,
and you all were housed, your unit was housed
where? Dorm 7. And that's in the quote, new dorm
area? New dorm area. That was my freshman year was
in Dorm 7. Was your roommate a special person in
your life? Interesting. I phoned him Stacha,
S-T-A-C-H-A, Anton Stacha. Good boy, from
Clifton, Texas. And never, probably about the
most provincial guy you've ever met in your life.
Just a real country boy. Good guy. And did freshman
roommates have a nickname then? Oh, yeah,
official name. Same as it is now. And that
friendship, has that proved lasting? Yeah,
Statue is one of those guys who really was not
college material, but he made it. Like a lot of
freshmen who came into court at that time were
really country boys. As you know, Andy was
considered to be kind of the poor boy at school at
that time. There's a lot of truth to that. It wasn't
universally true, but there's some truth to it.
I've lost contact with Statue. I don't know really
whatever happened to him. My next roommate, my
sophomore and junior years, is and was a lifetime
friend of Jack McCrary, who was the best man at my
wedding. M-C-C-R-A-R-Y.
So he was the roommate that I developed a strong and
lasting friendship with. I had dinner with him a
week ago. make believe that I had never heard what
it was like to be a freshman in the Corps of Cadets.
Describe it. It was, I guess it was kind of a shock
deal because it was, it was austere.
They shaved your heads and when they shave your
heads your
love life ceases totally. You, we had to make 21
formations I had
the unfortunate talent of being a good typist, so I
was the perk.
Every hour was filled. I was very unhappy first
semester. Also, I had no background in
engineering. My dad was a farmer. Came from three
generations of farmers. really went broke in the
50s because of the drought that we had. He was in
Catalan and farming and so it was a shock really to
get into engineering and just academically plus
the Corps of Cadets so it was it was traumatic.
Describe if you will a typical weekday of routine
what time to get up? Yeah it was regimented. It was
regimented. It was We had first call at 6.30. We had
formation, breakfast, then class, intramurals
in the afternoon. Then we had study hall from 7.30
to 10.30, lights out at 10.30. So it was a very
mechanical, rigid type of a situation.
Obviously, it's not a military school. It was a
state school. So I don't want to imply it was like
West Point or the Naval Academy, but it was pretty
close to it. Let's see, did you go to, you ate in
Duncan? I ate in Duncan every year except my senior
year. Did y'all march to all three meals? Yes. Did
you fall out and go? Yes. Describe a typical meal
for a fish. You know, it's interesting. The most I
guess the big protest of people who didn't know
what to expect, like my five friends from Lubbock
High School, was that we paid for this meal where we
could never eat dessert. They would have cush
questions, which were impossible to answer,
particularly when it was good cush. If it was bad
cush, it was easy questions. So we never ate
dessert. Bushes sat erect and had a certain
protocol as freshmen in the mess hall, which
everything kind of had a purpose to it, but it was
not a casual meal like I had today. Can you describe
for me some of the dining hall food slang?
Oh, gosh. Some of it was profane. Most of it was just
kush, was dessert. Gunwaden was bread. I don't
remember all of them, but everything had a name to
it. What about some of the beverages? Gosh, I'm not
sure. Milk? I'm not sure I remember. I recall
others. There were words that weren't quite as
cute as some of the others. Beans?
I don't recall that. Everything had a name. If you
called it by the wrong name, they wouldn't even
pass it to you. They'd ignore you. And as a fish,
what was your task at the table? Just to serve up the
classroom. You were strictly there just to
fulfill man's basic needs. Just need to have food,
but that was about it. There was no enjoyment. As
you look back on it, what general evaluation would
you give the quality of food? Oh, I thought the
quality of food was good. Yeah, it was, you know, it
was not the health food that we have today. But I
thought the food was good. We all, nobody ever went
hungry. Let's see, can you describe any of the
pranks that you freshmen may have played on
anybody? Well, I tell you, we're too afraid to do
that early. But after we kind of got into the
situation, taking the second semester of our
freshman year, we started doing pretty wild
things to upperclassmen.
Please describe some of them. Well, one which
stands in my memory, which will be in my memory to
the day I die, was there was one upperclassman that
we didn't like, not because he was hard on us, he was
just, he was slovenly. And we didn't like him. So,
uh, during the Christmas break, my freshman year,
my roommate or my good friend, Jack McCreary, and I
went over, they were building the Sabre motel. So
on highway six at the time, Jack McCreary came from
a very wealthy family. He was a little
extraordinary for Aggies. He had a big car, big
trunk. So we went over there that night. Uh, I think
the statute of limitations has passed. So I think I
can speak frankly. And we took a lot of the Austin
stone that they were building the Sabre Motel out
of and put it in this car. And then went over and
bought some water, sand. And we did a real nice
bricklaying job of the front of his door in the
hall. And I think it was dorm seven. And so when he
came, and then we put a
big I believe we put a cat in there and gave the cat a
lot of food. And then bricked it up. And when he came
back from the Christmas holidays, he had a
beautiful floor-to-ceiling brick wall in front
of his door and a cat who had enjoyed the luxury of an
unlimited supply of food and no sandbox in his
room. That's probably about the worst thing we
did. Oh, that's a good one. A good one. And I don't
think to this day ever knew who did it.
Let's see. Take me to class now. How did you... Did
you all go to class as a group or anything? What did
you wear to class? And what kind of behavior did you
and your colleagues practice in class? Well, we
were in summer uniform or winter uniform. Summer
uniform was just khaki. Winter uniform was a
little bit different type. I forgot the material
right now. And then we sometimes would go in
fatigues. We could go in fatigues when we had laps.
Of course, I'd be an engineering major. We had a lot
of labs. But you couldn't go in fatigues to class.
You had to wear fatigues only when there was a lab
involved. Again, I kind of went into a shock. I had
no engineering or technical background. That's
kind of a sidebar.
When I was a junior or senior in high school and my
dad was having such a tough time in the cattle
business, I asked a friend of mine's father, about
engineering because he was a very successful
consulting engineer. So he became kind of my very
mentor in encouraging me to get into engineering.
And he told me, he said, go to A&M, get an
engineering degree, and then go to the Army and go
to Corps of Engineers, work as a civilian for their
training program, and come back to Lubbock and
work for me. I did every one of those signs.
So the engineering, to get into engineering was
kind of a shock to me. I get a little nostalgic
sometimes when I talk about it, but it's kind of a
shock. But once I got through the first three or
four weeks, it became pretty easy for me. A fairly
significant question. Describe the role that
some of the significant teachers, advisors
played in your development. That's not too much my
freshman year. We had good instructors for
freshman year, but like any university, probably
you had your younger professors, assistant
professors coming in and teaching freshmen. As I
went through the teaching process, professors
certainly made a lasting impression on me. I can
name two or four today. Please do.
Doc Harrington, a hydraulics professor, was
really extraordinary. Dr. Nederman thought
reinforced concrete, who later became the
president of the University of Texas at
Arlington. Wendell Nederman. Wendell Nederman.
Outstanding professor.
Those were the two who I thought was most
impressive. There's a third one, though, who was
in his senior probably a senior tenure as a full
professor, well known, named Spencer Buchanan,
who taught me soil mechanics. And again, we didn't
know the profession at that time. We were
undergraduates. We didn't know the real depth and
strength of the profession. But it was obvious to
me that he was extraordinary. He had published
books. He was well known in the profession. It
meant more to me in graduate school than it did as an
undergraduate, because we just wanted to get out
of school and weren't really sensitive to all the
world of specialty professions, but Spencer
Buchanan, I would say those three were
extraordinary. Did you have Alphabet Thompson? I
did not. JGH? Mom Semang? I knew Semang. I did not
have him. Can you, do you remember any other
faculty nicknames? Oh, good gosh, yes. Please
share those. Well, Joe Sorrells was my sanitary
engineering professor. We called him Fecal Joe.
Joe Orr was my surveying professor. We called him
Shaky Joe. We were pretty low class back in those
days. He had an affliction where his hand shook
quite a bit. In fact, we had Junction as an adjunct.
We spent about six weeks out there with Shaky Joe.
Oh, we'll want to talk about Junction. Oh, I'll
tell you a lot about Junction. It was a great part of
my career.
We called Dr. Ned Rivets, because he was an
instructor and so forth.
Those were the nicknames. We had nicknames for
most of them, unless they were pretty straight.
For example, Doc Harrington. So lovable. I was
commanding officer in my outfit in my senior year
and making my faculty advisor. Remember any in
math or chemistry or biology? No, again, math and
chemistry and physics and thermo were adjuncts to
my profession. So you didn't really relate to
those professors. That's just something you had
to do. Double E, thermo. math, for example,
calculus, about as high as we went in this
engineering in those days. Those are people,
those are just things that we had to endure. I do
remember my physics professor. It was in 1956. I'm
not even sure I remember his name. He was a
Hungarian refugee who had just escaped the last
minute from the Hungarian Revolution. A real
young fellow, a brilliant guy. But I remember our
big complaint was we could hardly understand his
English. Obviously, he was picking up English,
but he was a great physicist. And what was his I
don't remember his name. I just remember that he
was the first professor I ever had who I had a hard
time understanding, which is a kind of
commonplace situation today. But most of my
non-track courses were just, you just endured it.
You had to do it. I didn't have any trouble in it. To
whom did you turn for academic advice? Who was your
key counselor advisor?
That's kind of interesting, Haskell, because I
really didn't seek much academic advice all the
way through school.
The first three or four or five weeks in
engineering were kind of a shock, but then I could
grasp it pretty easily. And once I got into that
rhythm, I just really knew where I was going, and I
just didn't really seek much help from any
academic advisor. It was there. I just didn't seek
it. Now, who was the dean then, dean of
engineering? I'm going to say John Calhoun. I
think that's correct. John Calhoun, which we
never saw. I just knew who he was. It's interesting
because I got to know him later in academic life. A
fellow named Wright was the head of the Civil
Engineering Department. We hardly ever saw him.
The people who got pretty high up never spent much
time, nor did we seek much time with
undergraduates. All right, let's go back to
Junction. Tell me all about Junction. Great
experience.
Junction was an adjunct of A&M, made famous, of
course, by Mayor Bryant. And it was a kind of Texas
Hill country and a beautiful place. And we went out
there for six weeks. The geologists and the civil
engineers went to Junction. And when did you go? It
was in the summertime. And it was a six-week,
pretty intense surveying camp. The geologists
went out there to look at the subsurface strata and
so forth. We went out there to learn surveying.
Shakey Joe Orr was our professor. He was the only
professor out there. And it was really a great
experience. We had a lot of fun because we lived in
these kind of semi-tents and all fell in love with
Junction Girls. This was in June? This was
probably July. I think they had two semis. Also,
they had a freshman orientation area. Some
freshmen would go to Junction for orientation. I
never did. We had freshmen, geologists, of course
when Baird Bryant was there, one football can, but
I think the Southwest Conference had to rule that
out after he was there. But the footprints were
there. I mean, we went through the same junction
they went through, except we just didn't have to
work as hard under Baird. We'd shakey-joke a
little easier than Baird Bryant. But it was just
great. We had fish on the weekends. We all had
girlfriends. A lot of us had girlfriends in
junction. All the junction high school boys had
this because when Aggies came in, we just kind of
took over the... the female stock there. And
where, on a Saturday night, where did y'all go for a
good time? We'd go country and western dancing. In
Junction? In Junction or some honky-tonk close
by. I had lots of honky-tonk. How did y'all get back
and forth? Most of us had cars. Most of us had cars.
This was our junior year. Two of our junior and
senior years, I recall. And so we would go to all
these little outlying towns, Sonora, Junction,
places like that that was on them. And Of course,
being a West Texan, I'd put on my boots and my cowboy
hat and stuff, left arm. We'd go out there and
dance. All right, now, and you did not, the summer
was not in Aggie Corps uniform or Corps. Oh, no. And
see, this time we had gone through kind of a weeding
out process. We were all, we became more
civilianized, I guess, as you go through the Corps
and you get through your sophomore year. And we
were on kind of a degree track, starting to think
about the future. So Junction was just a great
time. Not going to summer camp, summer boys camp,
except we got six hour or five hour credit course.
Had a lot of good experiences. It's kind of a side
issue. Shakey Joe had a red pickup. And in
describing surveying notes, you always, when you
get a certain surveying point and you locate it in
the coordinates and elevation, you describe it,
describe it so subsequent people can come out and
find it. And all of a sudden, we put down our notes,
this turning point or this benchmark is located
4.5 yards away from a red pickup truck. The Shakey
Joe would always come and check on us. Also, we had
a, shortly after the Korean War, we had a mountain
called Heartbreak Ridge. What you had to do is run a
string of levels to get the elevation up to the,
you'd go all the way up, and it'd take all day long.
There's old surveying equipment, so we'd have to
establish the elevation at the top of the
mountain. And of course, everybody knew what it
was from past classes. So it was pretty easy, and if
you didn't get within a tenth of a foot, then you had
to run it on Saturday. Well, that would have
disrupted our dancing and our social plans with
the Junction High School girls, so we all wanted to
make sure that we got it. Well, to make sure that
nobody cheated, Shakey Joe would take the last
shot on the rod to the transit to make sure that we
couldn't pencil it in. Not that we would have done
that, but it was a temptation to do that because we
all knew what the automation was. So he would stay
up there, he'd crawl up there, leave his red pickup
truck at the bottom of Heartbreak Hill and go up
there to the top and take the last shot to make sure
that you came in with a 10. 75% of us got it right. I
see. On Junction, two more questions.
Physically, what was there at the adjunct? They
had a cafeteria, kind of a mess hall. Really nice.
These were permanent buildings with screens and
permanent roofs at that time. So there was kind of
cabins which were all wood and screened at the top
and it wouldn't So that was about it. We had a, I
think we had a swimming pool. There was a, a river
ran through it and always had water. So it was, it
was not luxurious, but it was adequate. All right.
And now looking back, evaluate what that
experience was for you as an engineer. We had a lot
of bonding going on. We had some good friends out
there. We had surveying parties before each. So we
worked as, and we did a lot of pretty advanced
surveying at that time using that technology. It
was a great practical experience. In those days,
part of engineering was surveying. And I did a lot
of surveying in my first part of my professional
career. And probably we had the best surveying
education of any university in the country at that
time, right? College at that time. So it was a great
experience. It was a lot of fun. We learned a good
science. We learned to shoot the stars and
establish true north and all those kind of things.
Shoot polaris is what we called it. So it was a
big-time deal. I was a little bit saddened when A&M
transferred the country over to Texas Tech, but I
didn't know any of the details, but it was a great
part of my education. All right, let's go back into
the routine. What was it like to be a sophomore at
A&M compared to being a freshman? Well, a little
bit more of a human being. Let your hair grow out.
Start dating girls again. We're getting a little
bit more confidence in our curriculum. And I was,
again, in a company in a, ROTC unit that was working
with all technical people, engineers. So we made a
lot of fun at that time. We were only really
scholars and a whole bunch. Everybody else would
flunk out of engineering and go to business. So we
called engineering pre-prisoners
administration. That's what we all called it. But
the engineering curriculum was tough. But we, at
that time, when you're a sophomore, you figure out
you want to graduate. We could handle it. Corps was
our leisure. It was just more of the, you got to look
at more of the so-called college life and away from
the more rigid discipline that goes with
freshman. All right, and when you, what were the
expected, I'll say, rules of classroom behavior?
How did you expect? Well, there were really no
rules. It was just, no, there was, in my whole
career at A&M, I don't remember any misbehavior in
the classroom. None, zero. I don't remember any
rules and guidelines that never entered our mind.
There'd be any classroom behavior situations.
Did y'all expect to go to class regularly? Oh,
yeah. I mean, we wouldn't get out of school. I mean,
that wasn't any question, not going to class. One
time we'd cut class, maybe on a Friday afternoon on
one of our easier courses, and normally the
professor's pretty lean in that regard, but
cutting class was just unheard of. Do you have any
recollection of how much it cost for your, per
year? Absolutely, almost to the dollar. Please
describe that. My, virtually all of my classmates
were not subsidized. There were no scholarships.
There were scholarships available, but very few
of us won scholarships. I could make enough in the
summertime working as an intern consulting
engineer for my mentor that I mentioned
previously. I could make about $1,000 a summer. It
was all saved because I lived at home. I worked in
Lubbock. And it cost me about $1,000 a year. So I
think I probably got $300 or $400 of help from my
father. But I ended up out of A&M for a total cost of
about $4,000. I had no debt. And a college degree.
So it was a pretty simple thing. Now, if you didn't
work in the summer, you'd be subsidized,
obviously. Now, very few students worked. A few
worked as waiters, and we really respected those
guys. But very few, you couldn't be in the Corps and
work. You just couldn't do it, unless you were a
waiter.
Activities on the campus, the Y, the MSC, and so
forth, what were the places where you all went for
extracurricular events? I did not get involved in
any extracurricular events my freshman year. I
had all I could handle. And I really wasn't
oriented that way my freshman year. I just wanted
to survive. Sophomore year, a little bit. But
junior and senior year, I became much more
oriented toward extracurricular events. I was
very active in SCOMA, Student Council on National
Affairs. We had a lot of fun going to pick up
students at North Filch on the train coming up all
over the country. MSC, there were some activities
primarily through the MSC. I did not get involved
with the Y at all. We had what was called the Student
Chapter of American Society of Civil Engineers,
which I got involved with. But most of us
volunteers was great experience. So those are
most of the activities in which I became involved.
We also had a student body of the entity in the Army
called the American Ordnance Association, which
I spent some time with. Do you remember any famous
visitors or celebrities that you saw or heard?
Well, let me tell you just kind of a funny story. The
answer is not really. And let me underscore that
story. I went to the, my wife and I went to the
opening of the Bush Library. We're just about six
rows from the front. And we saw every living
president, except President Reagan, all living
first ladies, John Major, Doug Valenza, on and on
and on. And of course, a lot of... Corps members
were heavily involved in this. So I was talking to
one of the corps members after this was over, and I
said, I hope you recognize what a historic day this
was. And all these famous people on this campus. I
said, in my four years at A&M, all I saw was a drunk
ex-county commissioner. And there's a lot of
truth to that. I'm just making a funny story, but
there's a lot of truth to that. I don't remember any
really famous people. The only one I recall is
Schooner. We had Hubert Humphrey come down and
talk to us. And I remember his speakers before and
after him made a lot of fun of him. As you know, he's
very loquacious. And, in fact, the one after him
said, you know, when Senator Humphrey comes up and
talks, you don't know what he's going to say. When
he talks, you don't know what he said. And when he
gets through talking, you forget everything he
said. So they made a lot of fun of him. He was a very,
actually a very articulate guy. He's about the
only one I remember of any note that in my four
years, of course, President Eisenhower had been
there before, General Eisenhower. And we had
probably famous people before and after, but
during my tenure, very few people of
international note that I recall. Did you have any
interaction, acquaintance with Wayne Stark? Oh,
certainly. Describe him. Well, Wayne Stark, just
again, one of those men of history. Wayne had a real
propensity for students and picking out bright
students who he considered to be bright and acting
as a mentor to bring them along. In fact, it's hard
to talk about Wayne without getting a bit
emotional. I mean...
I share your feeling about him. I think Wayne was
right.